gh-95065: Add Argument Clinic support for deprecating positional use of parameters (#95151)
python/cpython: Doc/howto/clinic.rst

    #[python start generated code]*/
    def foo(): pass
    #/*[python checksum:...]*/

> How to deprecate positional use of optional parameters

Reviewer: Only *arguments* can be optional or required. But it does not matter here, because this feature is not limited for optional arguments.

What about the following variant?
```suggestion
How to deprecate passing the arguments positionally
```

Reviewer 2: +1 to what Serhiy says, but I'd drop the "the":

```suggestion
How to deprecate passing arguments positionally
```

------------------------------------------------------

Argument Clinic provides syntax that makes it possible to generate code that

> deprecates positional use of optional parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deprecates passing the arguments positionally.
```

Reviewer 2: Same here, the "the" is not required:

```suggestion
deprecates passing arguments positionally.
```

> For example, say we've got a module level function :py:func:`!foo.myfunc` that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, say we've got a module-level function :py:func:`!foo.myfunc` that
```

> takes three :class:`int` parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
has three :class:`int` :term:`parameters <parameter>`:
```

Reviewer 2: Hm, I prefer "takes" here. (But I agree with linking to the glossary definition of "parameter".)

Reviewer: Function *has* parameters (specified in function definition). It *takes* arguments (when called). If I understand this correctly.

> optional parameters *a* and *b*, and keyword-only parameter *c*::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
optional parameters *a* and *b*, and a keyword-only parameter *c*::
```

> optional parameters *a* and *b*, and keyword-only parameter *c*::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
positional-or-keyword parameters *a* and *b*, and a keyword-only parameter *c*::
```

   /*[clinic input]
   module foo
   myfunc
       a: int
       b: int
       *
       c: int
   [clinic start generated output]*/

We now want to make the *b* parameter keyword-only from Python 3.14 and onward,
and since :py:func:`!myfunc` is a public API,
we must follow :pep:`387` and issue a deprecation warning.
We can do that using the ``* [from ...]``` syntax,

> by adding the line ``* [from 3.14]`` right above the *b* parameter::

Reviewer 2: It's a little unclear here whether Python 3.14 is the next version of Python to be released, one version in the future, two versions in the future...

I suggest being more explicit about what version of Python is currently represented by the CPython `main` branch in this example -- Python 3.14 will one day be the CPython `main` branch, but I don't want us to have to update this example every year :)

   /*[clinic input]
   module foo
   myfunc
       a: int
       * [from 3.14]
       b: int
       *
       c: int
   [clinic start generated output]*/

Next, regenerate Argument Clinic code (``make clinic``),
and add unit tests for the new behaviour.

The generated code will now emit a :exc:`DeprecationWarning`

> when an the optional parameter *b* is used as a positional paremeter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
when an argument for the parameter *b* is passed positionally.
```

C preprocessor directives are also generated for emitting
compiler warnings if the ``* [from ...]`` line has not been removed
from the Argument Clinic input when the deprecation period is over,
which means when the beta phase of the specified Python version kicks in.

Let's return to our example and assume Python 3.14 development has entered the
beta phase, and we forgot all about updating the Argument Clinic code for
:py:func:`!myfunc`.
Luckily for us, compiler warnings are now generated:

.. code-block:: none

   In file included from Modules/foomodule.c:139:
   Modules/clinic/foomodule.c.h:83:8: warning: Update 'b' in 'myfunc' in 'foomodule.c' to be keyword-only. [-W#warnings]
    #    warning "Update 'b' in 'myfunc' in 'foomodule.c' to be keyword-only."
         ^

We now close the deprecation phase by making *b* keyword-only;
replace the ``* [from ...]``` line above *b*
with the ``*`` from the line above *c*::

   /*[clinic input]
   module foo
   myfunc
       a: int
       *
       b: int
       c: int
   [clinic start generated output]*/

Finally, run ``make clinic`` to regenerate the Argument Clinic code,

> and update your unit tests to reflect the new behaviour.

Reviewer 2: (*Grumbles about how `make clinic` doesn't work on Windows* -- but I'm guessing that's probably a broader issue across this piece of documentation, and if so, it shouldn't really be addressed in this PR :)

.. note::

>    If you forget to update your clinic code during the target beta phase, the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If you forget to update your clinic input during the target beta phase, the
```

Also, what's meant by "target" in the phrase "target beta phase"?

```suggestion
   If you forget to update your clinic input during the beta phase, the
```

>    copmiler warning will turn into a compiler error when the release candidate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   compiler warning will turn into a compiler error when the release candidate
```

>    phase kicks in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   phase begins.
```

    #[python start generated code]*/
    def foo(): pass
    #/*[python checksum:...]*/

How to deprecate passing parameters positionally
------------------------------------------------

Argument Clinic provides syntax that makes it possible to generate code that
deprecates passing :term:`arguments <argument>` positionally.
For example, say we've got a module-level function :py:func:`!foo.myfunc`
that has three :term:`parameters <parameter>`:
positional-or-keyword parameters *a* and *b*, and a keyword-only parameter *c*::

   /*[clinic input]
   module foo
   myfunc
       a: int
       b: int
       *
       c: int
   [clinic start generated output]*/

> We now want to make the *b* parameter keyword-only.
> For this example, imagine we're in the development phase for Python 3.12,
> meaning we can deprecate positional use of *b* earliest in Python 3.14 and onward
> (see :pep:`387` -- *Backwards Compatibility Policy*).
> We can do that using the ``* [from ...]``` syntax,
> by adding the line ``* [from 3.14]`` right above the *b* parameter::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We now want to make the *b* parameter keyword-only;
however, we'll have to wait two releases before making this change,
as mandated by Python's backwards-compatibility policy (see :pep:`387`).
For this example, imagine we're in the development phase for Python 3.12:
that means we'll be allowed to introduce deprecation warnings in Python 3.12
whenever the *b* parameter is passed positionally,
and we'll be allowed to make it keyword-only in Python 3.14 at the earliest.

We can use Argument Clinic to emit the desired deprecation warnings
using the ``* [from ...]``` syntax,
by adding the line ``* [from 3.14]`` right above the *b* parameter::
```

   /*[clinic input]
   module foo
   myfunc
       a: int
       * [from 3.14]
       b: int
       *
       c: int
   [clinic start generated output]*/

Next, regenerate Argument Clinic code (``make clinic``),
and add unit tests for the new behaviour.

The generated code will now emit a :exc:`DeprecationWarning`
when an :term:`argument` for the :term:`parameter` *b* is passed positionally.
C preprocessor directives are also generated for emitting
compiler warnings if the ``* [from ...]`` line has not been removed
from the Argument Clinic input when the deprecation period is over,
which means when the alpha phase of the specified Python version kicks in.

> Let's return to our example and assume Python 3.14 development has entered the
> alpha phase, and we forgot all about updating the Argument Clinic code for
> :py:func:`!myfunc`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's return to our example and skip ahead two years:
Python 3.14 development has now entered the alpha phase,
but we forgot all about updating the Argument Clinic code
for :py:func:`!myfunc`!
```

    #/*[python checksum:...]*/

How to deprecate passing parameters positionally
------------------------------------------------

Argument Clinic provides syntax that makes it possible to generate code that
deprecates passing :term:`arguments <argument>` positionally.
For example, say we've got a module-level function :py:func:`!foo.myfunc`
that has three :term:`parameters <parameter>`:
positional-or-keyword parameters *a* and *b*,

> and a :ref:`keyword-only <keyword-only_parameter>` parameter *c*::

Reviewer: Since there is a link to `parameter` in the same sentence, I do not think that a link to `keyword-only_parameter` is needed. They lead to the same glossary entry, why contains also the definition of positional-or-keyword parameters.

Author: Thanks. I'll get to this later today.
